lesson3/preparation_flipped_classroom.md, before:

# Preparation for (semi) flipped classroom

This is the preparation for the (semi) flipped classroom (vs. "old style" presential classes). 

We say (semi) flipped classroom, because part of the teaching is still done on the Sunday class.


## Class videos

Since this is a semi flipped classroom, where you prepare the class during the week and then the teaching on Sunday will build on what you prepared, it is important that you watch the following videos:

 - [SQL vs NoSQL or MySQL vs MongoDB](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZS_kXvOeQ5Y)
 - [MongoDB Complete Introduction & Summary](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VELru-FCWDM) (up to minute 32)

And if you want to experiment more with mongoDB commands, you can check [these tutorials](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/mongodb/index.htm).

## Readings

- [The ACID Database Model](https://www.thoughtco.com/the-acid-model-1019731)
- [Why you should never use MongoDB](http://www.sarahmei.com/blog/2013/11/11/why-you-should-never-use-mongodb)


## Exercise before class

There is no real exercise this time, just come ready to discuss what are the pros and cons of noSQL and SQL, and when to use SQL vs. noSQL.


## Checklist

You are ready for Sunday's class if:
 - you have watched the `Class videos`;
 - you have read the articles under `Readings`;
 - you know when to use SQL and when to use noSQL.

If you run into trouble completing any of the above, please ask for help in the class channel :)

Commit message:

Add note about video in prep for lesson3

lesson3/preparation_flipped_classroom.md, after:

# Preparation for (semi) flipped classroom

This is the preparation for the (semi) flipped classroom (vs. "old style" presential classes). 

We say (semi) flipped classroom, because part of the teaching is still done on the Sunday class.


## Class videos

Since this is a semi flipped classroom, where you prepare the class during the week and then the teaching on Sunday will build on what you prepared, it is important that you watch the following videos:

 - [SQL vs NoSQL or MySQL vs MongoDB](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZS_kXvOeQ5Y)
 - [MongoDB Complete Introduction & Summary](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VELru-FCWDM) (up to minute 32)

The last video is not totally up to date, the configuration of the mongo atlas looks a bit different, but it should work fine still. And the good part is that it no longer requires a credit card at all to use mongo atlas.

And if you want to experiment more with mongoDB commands, you can check [these tutorials](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/mongodb/index.htm).

## Readings

- [The ACID Database Model](https://www.thoughtco.com/the-acid-model-1019731)
- [Why you should never use MongoDB](http://www.sarahmei.com/blog/2013/11/11/why-you-should-never-use-mongodb)


## Exercise before class

There is no real exercise this time, just come ready to discuss what are the pros and cons of noSQL and SQL, and when to use SQL vs. noSQL.


## Checklist

You are ready for Sunday's class if:
 - you have watched the `Class videos`;
 - you have read the articles under `Readings`;
 - you know when to use SQL and when to use noSQL.

If you run into trouble completing any of the above, please ask for help in the class channel :)
