lesson1/README.md, before:

# Lesson 1: Retrieving Data

In this class, students will be introduced to relational data terminology (row, column), the function of a primary key, and retrieving data from a MySQL database using SELECT queries.

Objective: Students should be able to retrieve data from a database table using SELECT statements that include WHERE, GROUP BY, and ORDER BY.

## Pre-Class Preparation

Before the class you should install MySQL on your computer:

- Instructions for macOS: [click here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7S_tz1z_5bA&t=290s)
- Instructions for Windows: [click here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7S_tz1z_5bA&t=588s)

And watch this video: https://youtu.be/geetitV4u3s

## Main Topics

- The relational model of data
- A 'database' vs. a 'DBMS' (database management system)
- The concept of a schema
- The properties of an 'entity' (or 'row')
- Basic entity relationship diagrams
- A basic SELECT statement
- Constructing more complex SELECT statements
- Pattern matching with LIKE
- Limiting and ordering results with LIMIT and ORDER BY
- Grouping results with GROUP BY
- Aggregate functions like AVG, COUNT, SUM, MIN and MAX
- JOIN
  - Selecting composite data from multiple tables
  - Compare JOIN WHERE with cartesian product
- Naming Conventions: UpperCamelCase/PascalCase, lowerCamelCase, snake_case, hnHungarianNotation/HNHungarianNotation
- Character Sets in Databases (hint: always use UTF-8 encoding, called 'utf8mb4' in MySQL)

## Reference Material

- [TutorialsPoint MySQL Introduction](http://www.tutorialspoint.com/mysql/mysql-introduction.htm)
- [w3schools tutorial (easy to find how specific commands work)](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/default.asp)
- [Official MySQL Documentation](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/)
- [Official MySQL Tutorial (pretty dense)](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/tutorial.html)
- [Joel Spolsky - Character Sets and Unicode](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2003/10/08/the-absolute-minimum-every-software-developer-absolutely-positively-must-know-about-unicode-and-character-sets-no-excuses/)

## Get git ready to work on homework

Using the `hyf-homework` repo. In the terminal run `git status`

If there are changes that have not been committed, figure out what to do with those changes

- Should they be committed to another branch?
- Should they be committed to `master`?
- Should they be discarded?

When you have figured out what to do with the changes and fixed those. Write `git status` again. If it says `nothing to commit, working tree clean`. Then you are ready to create the branch for this weeks homework.

### Creating the branch

Using the `hyf-homework` repo write this command

`git checkout master` - You are now on the `master` branch

`git checkout -b databases-week1`

This will create and checkout the branch so you are ready make commits to it

[This video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XYlgh9hSWtw) can help. On slack use the #git-support channel to ask questions about git

## Homework

Design queries that retrieve the following data sets. Compare with classmates to see if your answers are correct.

1. Find out how many tasks are in the task table
2. Find out how many tasks in the task table do not have a valid due date
3. Find all the tasks that are marked as done
4. Find all the tasks that are not marked as done
5. Get all the tasks, sorted with the most recently created first
6. Get the single most recently created task
7. Get the title and due date of all tasks where the title or description contains **database**
8. Get the title and status (as text) of all tasks
9. Get the name of each status, along with a count of how many tasks have that status
10. Get the names of all statuses, sorted by the status with most tasks first

Watch the previous session recorded on video here:

Part 1 : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gAeww1z5774

Part 2 : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u77w6Lw2gOY

Part 3 : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mag9n6olmRU

## Hand in Homework:

Watch [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XYlgh9hSWtw) for a more detailed go-through of how to hand in homework!

- Use the branch called `databases-week1`
- Add all your changes to this branch in the `databases-week1` folder.
- Go through the [Homework checklist](#homework-checklist)
- Create a pull request using the `databases-week1` branch
- Wait for mentor feedback
- Implement feedback, `add`, `commit` and `push` the changes
- Now you can merge the changes into `master`
- When merged you can **share the github link** to your classes slack channel if you are **proud of what you did** 💪
- Now celebrate 🎉🎉🎉

## Homework checklist

Go over your homework one last time:

- [ ] Does every file run without errors and with the correct results?
- [ ] Have you used `const` and `let` and avoided `var`?
- [ ] Do the variable, function and argument names you created follow the [Naming Conventions](https://github.com/HackYourFuture/fundamentals/blob/master/fundamentals/naming_conventions.md)?
- [ ] Is your code well-formatted (see [Code Formatting](https://github.com/HackYourFuture/fundamentals/blob/master/fundamentals/naming_conventions.md))?

## Feedback giving time!

Find a student to give feedback using this site: https://hyf-peer-review.herokuapp.com/. The feedback should be given after the homework has been handed in, preferably two days after.

Give the review on the PR exactly how the mentors do it! To find the link for the PR ask the person you are reviewing :) You can see how to give feedback on a PR using github [here](https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request)

To help you get started with reviewing we have created [some ressources](https://github.com/HackYourFuture-CPH/curriculum/tree/master/review) about giving feedback. Find them

Why is it important to give feedback? Because it will make you a [better](https://www.brightspot.com/blog/developer-life-5-reasons-why-the-code-review-process-is-critical-for-developers) [developer](https://www.sitepoint.com/the-importance-of-code-reviews/)

Commit message:

Adding Docker + MySQL VSCode Plugin instructions
Adding Docker + MySQL VSCode Plugin instructions as an alternative to MySQL Workbench installation

lesson1/README.md, after:

# Lesson 1: Retrieving Data

In this class, students will be introduced to relational data terminology (row, column), the function of a primary key, and retrieving data from a MySQL database using SELECT queries.

Objective: Students should be able to retrieve data from a database table using SELECT statements that include WHERE, GROUP BY, and ORDER BY.

## Pre-Class Preparation

Before the class you should either install MySQL Workbench on your computer or Docker and MySQL VScode plugin and use MySQL workbench via Docker. The latter option will avoid some installation issues on some of the operating systems.

#1 option - installing MySQL Workbench on your computer:

- Instructions for macOS: [click here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7S_tz1z_5bA&t=290s)
- Instructions for Windows: [click here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7S_tz1z_5bA&t=588s)

And watch this video: https://youtu.be/geetitV4u3s (please consider that these instructions were created before we added the #2 option)

#2 option - installing Docker and the MySQL VScode plugin:

- Install docker by following the instructions here: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1YE7kIx6NxNHi72VSwh3sN5qMLCAisvJJ/view
= Install the MySQL VSCode plugin by following the instructions here: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1sxLcPXPN_USOFwDKIESN3Cem2377iGWB/view
To learn what Docker is, you can read these articles:
 - https://medium.com/@SaadAAkash/docker-for-dummies-literally-ab3fc6362d5f
 - https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/docker-simplified-96639a35ff36/
 
Docker is widely used by software developers these days, i’d say it’s been a
game changer, so it’s good for you if you at least know what it is :slightly_smiling_face:


## Main Topics

- The relational model of data
- A 'database' vs. a 'DBMS' (database management system)
- The concept of a schema
- The properties of an 'entity' (or 'row')
- Basic entity relationship diagrams
- A basic SELECT statement
- Constructing more complex SELECT statements
- Pattern matching with LIKE
- Limiting and ordering results with LIMIT and ORDER BY
- Grouping results with GROUP BY
- Aggregate functions like AVG, COUNT, SUM, MIN and MAX
- JOIN
  - Selecting composite data from multiple tables
  - Compare JOIN WHERE with cartesian product
- Naming Conventions: UpperCamelCase/PascalCase, lowerCamelCase, snake_case, hnHungarianNotation/HNHungarianNotation
- Character Sets in Databases (hint: always use UTF-8 encoding, called 'utf8mb4' in MySQL)

## Reference Material

- [TutorialsPoint MySQL Introduction](http://www.tutorialspoint.com/mysql/mysql-introduction.htm)
- [w3schools tutorial (easy to find how specific commands work)](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/default.asp)
- [Official MySQL Documentation](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/)
- [Official MySQL Tutorial (pretty dense)](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/tutorial.html)
- [Joel Spolsky - Character Sets and Unicode](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2003/10/08/the-absolute-minimum-every-software-developer-absolutely-positively-must-know-about-unicode-and-character-sets-no-excuses/)

## Get git ready to work on homework

Using the `hyf-homework` repo. In the terminal run `git status`

If there are changes that have not been committed, figure out what to do with those changes

- Should they be committed to another branch?
- Should they be committed to `master`?
- Should they be discarded?

When you have figured out what to do with the changes and fixed those. Write `git status` again. If it says `nothing to commit, working tree clean`. Then you are ready to create the branch for this weeks homework.

### Creating the branch

Using the `hyf-homework` repo write this command

`git checkout master` - You are now on the `master` branch

`git checkout -b databases-week1`

This will create and checkout the branch so you are ready make commits to it

[This video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XYlgh9hSWtw) can help. On slack use the #git-support channel to ask questions about git

## Homework

Design queries that retrieve the following data sets. Compare with classmates to see if your answers are correct.

1. Find out how many tasks are in the task table
2. Find out how many tasks in the task table do not have a valid due date
3. Find all the tasks that are marked as done
4. Find all the tasks that are not marked as done
5. Get all the tasks, sorted with the most recently created first
6. Get the single most recently created task
7. Get the title and due date of all tasks where the title or description contains **database**
8. Get the title and status (as text) of all tasks
9. Get the name of each status, along with a count of how many tasks have that status
10. Get the names of all statuses, sorted by the status with most tasks first

Watch the previous session recorded on video here:

Part 1 : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gAeww1z5774

Part 2 : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u77w6Lw2gOY

Part 3 : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mag9n6olmRU

## Hand in Homework:

Watch [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XYlgh9hSWtw) for a more detailed go-through of how to hand in homework!

- Use the branch called `databases-week1`
- Add all your changes to this branch in the `databases-week1` folder.
- Go through the [Homework checklist](#homework-checklist)
- Create a pull request using the `databases-week1` branch
- Wait for mentor feedback
- Implement feedback, `add`, `commit` and `push` the changes
- Now you can merge the changes into `master`
- When merged you can **share the github link** to your classes slack channel if you are **proud of what you did** 💪
- Now celebrate 🎉🎉🎉

## Homework checklist

Go over your homework one last time:

- [ ] Does every file run without errors and with the correct results?
- [ ] Have you used `const` and `let` and avoided `var`?
- [ ] Do the variable, function and argument names you created follow the [Naming Conventions](https://github.com/HackYourFuture/fundamentals/blob/master/fundamentals/naming_conventions.md)?
- [ ] Is your code well-formatted (see [Code Formatting](https://github.com/HackYourFuture/fundamentals/blob/master/fundamentals/naming_conventions.md))?

## Feedback giving time!

Find a student to give feedback using this site: https://hyf-peer-review.herokuapp.com/. The feedback should be given after the homework has been handed in, preferably two days after.

Give the review on the PR exactly how the mentors do it! To find the link for the PR ask the person you are reviewing :) You can see how to give feedback on a PR using github [here](https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request)

To help you get started with reviewing we have created [some ressources](https://github.com/HackYourFuture-CPH/curriculum/tree/master/review) about giving feedback. Find them

Why is it important to give feedback? Because it will make you a [better](https://www.brightspot.com/blog/developer-life-5-reasons-why-the-code-review-process-is-critical-for-developers) [developer](https://www.sitepoint.com/the-importance-of-code-reviews/)
